---
title: Bike Fitting
date: 2022/05/25
updated: 2022/05/25
tags:
  - Notes
  - Cycling
---

Taken from the
[Bike Fit Tuesdays](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RNLQY6gBZsg&list=PLMZ241fyVfiv3eAJ4UYkzeb2JltpLSlzs)
series from the Francis Cade YouTube channel.

<!-- more -->

I like BikeFitJames. As he often explains, many bike fitters are very
systematic, relying exclusively on data produced by specialized equipment to
conclude how an individual should interact with their bicycle.

This series, plus supporting vlogs, demonstrate why this is a poor approach, why
a pragmatic approach is better, and how he gets people comfortable on a bike.

Thanks James.

<!-- TODO rename -->

## Introduction

People interact with a bike in three places:

- _Controls_ (handlebars and levers)
- _Saddle_ (or seat)
- _Pedals_

The saddle takes the majority of the rider's weight and the pedals receive all
the rider's power. Getting these right provides the foundation of the fit, and
the physiological needs of the rider then dictate the placement of the controls.

As the sport has evolved, bicycle design has changed to reflect (and drive) the
needs of riders. A traditional 56cm frame would measure 56cm on the top tube and
seat tube with little handlebar drop. Modern race-oriented frames are more
aggressive; a longer top tube places more weight towards the front of the bike
and long 'n' low stems typically beef up the handlebar drop. Drivetrain
advancements, such as press-fit bottom brackets, have also narrowed bikes.

<!-- TODO work out captioning -->

{% img "/images/adam hansen bike.jpg" %}

This has lead to a common problem in bike fitting: many everyday people struggle
to get comfortable on their expensive bikes. Maintaining an aggressive position
requires flexibility, strength, and little upper body mass, which does not
describe the average office worker.

As a result, riders commonly feel stretched out or folded in half, necessitating
_acts of sacrifice_ like leaning off to the dominant side of the saddle.

## Stance

The horizontal distance between your feet on the pedals.

It is not the same as _q-factor_, which instead measures the horizontal distance
between the crank arms.

### Adjustment

The easiest and free-est starting point is the cleat placement in the shoe: move
them inwards to increase stance, move them outwards to decrease stance.

Next come pedal washers, up to ~2mm, pedal spindle extenders, or long-axle
pedals.

Lastly, q-factor can also change stance, however needing new cranks to eek out
your stance to the extreme suggests a proper bike fit is in order.
