---
title: Processes of Decomposition
date: 2021-11-22
---

The design of a system outlines what the system is and is not for, describes the
overall architecture following which the system will be developed, and details
its static structure and dynamic behaviour.

At this point, we have some amount of user profiles/personas, scenarios,
storyboards, wireframes, and (non-)functional requirements. We can now
start<!--excerpt--> decomposing the system concept into a theoretical
representation.<!--excerpt-->

Documenting the design should be done various levels of complexity/abstraction.
Without simplification, the design process would be trivial since it would match
the implementation identically.

_Functional design_ concentrates on the functionality of the system, whereas
_operational Design_ concentrates on the operational aspects; e.g., hardware
set-up, what functionality runs where, network design. With the movement in
modern software development towards the cloud, this is becoming less relevant.

Good design addresses and includes extensibility, modularity, reusability,
maintainability, usability, and clarity.

## Balance for all involved

When designing an application, a requirement will have many possible design
solutions; the users, developers, and maintainers must all be considered, as an
imbalance will lead to detriment for everyone.

For example, over-simplified applications will be easier to create but the
end-user will not be happy with the system

By contrast, complex systems will be harder to develop and maintain; this costs
time and money which ultimately affects the end-user.

## Using patterns

Most 'new' solutions are simply an adaptation of existing applications, so the
wheel need not be reinvented. More importantly, use design patterns which are
relevant to the solution. e.g., N-tier or lter for a .NET API written with C#.

Design patterns also accommodate for changes and maintenance, as new designers
will have a fundamental understanding of the system before tacking domain
knowledge, implementation, etc.

## Representation

Designs should be represented with models because they're a proven and
well-accepted method.

They should demonstrate the functionality of the system at different levels of
complexity/abstraction. This makes the design more accessible, as the system can
be understood at the level desired by an individual. Inherently, it is important
to ensure a representation is not oversimplified or important details may be
masked.

Provided the developers of the system respect the design, a system's model will
closely resemble the technical implementation of the system, so getting the
models correct is key to smooth development.

## Making Decisions

Although some aspects of the solution will have a clearly optimal design, most
aspects of a project will require some level of decision-making.

As such, it is important to document any/all decisions. Not only does it simply
provide evidence of the decisions made by the team, but producing a standardized
document ensures all factors motivating the decision are valid.

{% caption "Example Decision Template" %}

| Decision          | [ID] - [Name]                                                   |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Subject Area      | Area of concern                                                 |
| Topic             | Topic of interest                                               |
| Summary           | Summary of the decision made, ideally in the imperative tense   |
| Problem Statement | A short description of the problem, i.e., what is being decided |
| Assumptions       | What is believed to be true about the context of the problem    |
| Motivation        | Why is the decision important?                                  |
| Alternatives      | A list of alternatives and explanations                         |
| Decision          | The decision taken, possibly with references to related work    |
| Justification     | Why the decision was made                                       |
| Implications      | What impact the decision will have                              |
| Justification     | A list of requirements that are generated by this problem       |
| Implications      | A list of related decisions                                     |

{% endcaption %}

## System Boundary

(This is not well explained; most of this is my interpretation so it might be
wrong 🤷‍♂️)

A _system boundary_ determines where aspects of the system are sourced by
decomposing the top-level functionality of the solution; basically:

- What is the purpose of the system?
- What the system does not do
- What are the external dependencies?

Think of it as an extension of scope; after defining what the system should do,
the system boundary determines whether each aspect of the system is 'in scope'
for creation or resourced from an existing solution.

System boundary also considers human sources for input/output, so these devices
should be considered as well, e.g., PIN number entry pad.

Lastly, _system environment_ refers to anything which affects/can be affected by
the system, excluding the system itself.

### Representation

A _system context diagram_ is the typical way to represent the system boundary,
represented as a simple, 'free form' sketch. The relationships between systems
can be ambiguous and considers:

- Who/what is interacting with the target system?
- What are they doing and how?

{% caption_img "system context diagram.png" "System Context Diagram" %}

## Solution Structure

Following the system boundary, the _solution structure_ identifies the main
conceptual elements (subsystems) of the system and their relationships; e.g.,
the core subsystem, connections, data stores, users, external systems, etc.

Think about:

- How the system will be accessed?
- What are the main conceptual elements?
- How the elements communicate with each other?

### Representation

An _architecture overview diagram_ is the typical way to represent solution
structure. It is a (usually) static, informal diagram with supporting text.

The definition is pretty loose, so they can identify a wide range of subsystems.
However, there are some typical organisational groupings: users help to identify
the roles of people using the system; channels identify how the system can be
used/accessed, e.g., Browser, Mobile, Integrated PoS terminal; application
identifies the subsystems; and resources contain the systems used by the
application. Additionally, splitting the groups further or color-coding can add
more detail.

It does not need to be implementation-specific, i.e., 'Database' could be
sufficient, but 'AWS Cloud Hosting' is also acceptable.

{%
    caption_img
    "architecture overview diagram.png"
    "Architecture Overview Diagram"
%}

## Refinement

Following the _solution structure_, the application's subsystems are iteratively
(and recursively) designed in the refinement process:

- How can the conceptual elements be subdivided into subsystems?
- How do the subsystems look like?
- How do the subsystems interact with each other functionally?

### Types of Subsystems

The definition of a subsystem is very flexible but it basically has to be
sizeable. For example, look at the subsystems for a remote control:

1.  Case
2.  Power supply
3.  Circuit board
    1. Chips
    2. Fuses
    3. IR blaster
    4. Integrated circuits
       1. Capacitors
       2. Resistors
       3. Bridges

There are however some very common subsystem types.

<span role="heading">Component</span> A modular unit of functionality, usually
identified the architecture definition.

Its state and operations are declared using one or more interfaces, so the
definition should not be implementation specific.

They are functionally independent, meaning they do one thing.

Components are defined at a technical level, e.g., `MessageQueue`, or
application level, e.g., `OrderProcessor`.

<span role="heading">Class</span> The usual.

<span role="heading">Entity</span> A class with a conceptualisable existence,
most often physical like a `Person`, or not, like a `Report`.

<span role="heading">Service</span> A group of specifications, exposed through
JSON, API, method, etc.

They can be consumed, e.g., `StockPriceService`, `UserAuthoriser`, or provided
using components or classes.

### It's all about the process

Generally, this process considers the structure of each subsystem, and how they
interact.

Start with **identification** of the subsystems, and assign responsibility,
based on the requirements document. Define the relationships between subsystems
and outline their interactions. Use existing design/architecture patterns to
ensure the system interactions are clean and consistent.

Next comes **specification**, which tackles implementation detail by creating
the interfaces for each subsystem. This includes their operations, i.e.,
parameters, return values; and their contract behaviour, such as pre- and
post-conditions.

### Guidelines

<span role="heading">Cohesion</span> The strength of dependency **within** the
system. The goal is to create functionally independent but interdependent
subsystems, meaning each subsystem has one responsibility and utilises other
subsystems to delegate other responsibilities required to function.

❌ Low cohesion means a subsystem's functionalities have no meaningful
relationship, only in time, i.e., a process may use them in the same block of
code.

✔️ High cohesion means the opposite. For example, the functionalities can use
each other (functional), use the output of one as an input for another
(sequential), or compose a greater procedure to be used in order (procedural).

<span role="heading">Coupling</span> The strength of dependencies **between**
subsystems. Good coupling allows dependencies to change their implementation
without requiring changes to its dependants.

❌ Strong coupling means subsystems refer to the same global data 'area' and the
internal logic of the subsystem cannot be isolated from the implementation of
its subsystems.

✔️ Loose coupling the logic between subsystems to be isolated, and communication
is handled with fundamental data types like domain entities or technical
classes.

<span role="heading">Isolation</span> The degree to which the product depends on
technologies. It also considers recognisability of its design and
implementation.

❌ Low isolation means subsystems depend on technologies, such as a native app;
and fail to use standard patterns, e.g., directing with a database directly.

✔️ High isolation means the opposite, e.g., a web app (any platform) which uses
an ORM to omit database specifics from the application code.

<span role="heading">Layering</span> Partitioning the concerns/responsibilities
of a large subsystem into general categories.

🤷‍♂️ Horizontal layering categorises by functional responsibility, e.g.,
presentation, business, and data layer. This is referred to N-tier architecture.

🤷‍♂️ Vertical layering categorises by business/domain responsibility, e.g., a
query, handler, and view model to `CreateProduct`. One example is onion
architecture.

### Types of Models

<span role="heading">Static models</span> A static, logical view of the
application including state and relationships (e.g., entity relationship, class,
component, service model).

<span role="heading">Dynamic models</span> (or _behavioural models_) demonstrate
the interactions between the subsystems (e.g., use-case diagram, sequence
diagrams).

End-user interactions are modelled with
<a href="{% post_path notes-on-software-design/requirements %}#Use-Cases">use-case
diagrams</a>.

Technical interactions within a subsystem show the complex behaviours of the
implementation like method and service calls, modelled with flowcharts or
activity diagrams.

Modelling between systems is captured with interactions models: when ordered by
time, a sequence diagram; when ordered by organization, collaboration or
communication diagrams.
