---
title: Business Case
date: 2021-11-15
---

For a project, <!--excerpt-->the business case defines what is to be done, why,
and the timescales/costs involved.<!--excerpt--> No project should be undertaken
without first establishing a business case for it, as there is no justification
for it otherwise.

The progress of the project measured is against the business case to ensure
timescales/costs are not being exceeded and business benefits are not being
eroded (i.e., it is still worth doing).

## Choosing the Right Type

Frankly, business cases are boring and confusing, easy to write poorly, and may
be unconvincing. As such, business cases are a balancing act of length: long
enough to provide sufficient detail, while short enough to maintain interest.

A _Summary Business Plan_ is around 10-15 pages, best used for new ventures and
early stages of development.

A _Full Business Plan_ is still applicable for new ventures, but with interim
stages of development, including a blueprint of the business; these are around
25-35 pages long.

Lastly, an _Operational Business Plan_, at 40-100 pages, contains a blueprint
for operations, including details of operational and financial measures.

## Speaking Proper

Be **specific** and **explicit** when describing the business benefits. Avoid
vague phrases like 'helps a lot', 'very important', 'too much', and 'too many'.
Instead, use values, estimates, and ranges, e.g., _"We will increase customer
patronage by 25%"_.

Be **realistic**. Don't make false promises about the product, instead
demonstrating the benefits and challenges.

Be **conservative** in objectives, costs, timescales, and deliverables;
overproducing by a small amount is great for client and makes the business look
good. By contrast, being too conservative impresses to the customer that
estimations about your own work aren't accurate.

Use **visuals**; investors like illustrations, e.g. graphs, charts, business
models, and tables. Find them online (with references) or create your own.

## Considerations

**Aim:** What decision(s) actually need to be made?

**Audience:** Who is making these decisions? Their interests as a business
should be considered, as well as their style, i.e., grand vision or facts 'n'
figures.

**Arrangement and Appearance:** How is it going to look? Alongside a good
[structure](#structure), the appearance is just as important. Information should
be easy to find, the [writing](#speaking-proper) should be engaging, and
diagrams should look pretty.

## Structure

For all [types of business cases](#Choosing-the-Right-Type), there will be
roughly 7 aspects to the business case.

### Introduction and Background

This details the purpose of the document, i.e., the business case for the
project, and the background of the proposed project respectively.

### Management Summary

Also known as an Executive Summary, it describes the problem/opportunity the
project intends to address and states the options considered for the project.
All should state why they have (not) been recommended, and the recommended
option should further detail the expected business benefits.

This makes the management summary the most important part of the business case,
as most 'executive readers', i.e. potential customers, are cash-rich but
time-poor.

### Description of the Problem

Elaborating further, this adds adds detail to the business problem &
opportunity. It includes the available options to solve the problem, with the
considerations and justifications for viable and rejected options. The option of
doing nothing should also be discussed.

### Cost/Benefit Analysis

This quantifies the costs of carrying out the project and the expected benefits.
The costs can either be tangible, like <q>it will cost x amount</q> or <q>an
expected increase of 20% to the user base</q>; or intangible, like long-term
benefits or competitor elimination by offering new products.

Note: intangible benefits will be questioned by the project tenders, as their
benefit is subjective by nature.

### Impacts

These are essentially the 'side-effects' of the project solution. For example,
developing a solution to automate a process within a business affects the
employees currently responsible for the manual process. This makes them hard to
quantify, as they predominantly affect the customer's business.

### Risks

The principle risks must also be outlined, with a recommended option and
proposed measures to either avoid or mitigate them.

### Conclusions and Recommendations

Lastly, a summary of the business case and the required decisions from the
customer are found in the _conclusions and recommendations_, based on the
Management Summary.
